[Previous](ceos-seo.md) | [Table of contents](/README.md) | [Next](nasa.md)

***

## 4.2. GEO

**Overview**

[The Group on Earth Observations (GEO)](https://earthobservations.org/index.php) is an intergovernmental partnership that connects governments, academia, organizations, civil society, and the private sector to tackle global challenges through innovative solutions that harness the power of [Earth Intelligence](https://earthobservations.org/resources/what-is-earth-intelligence). Among its founding Participating Organizations is CEOS, whose member space agencies provide critical EO satellite data that drive GEO’s activities worldwide.

One of the five goals of the [GEO Post-2025 Strategy](https://earthobservations.org/resources#AJbe25j1Vo) is to integrate EO, models, and innovative new technologies, including artificial intelligence and machine learning, into the design of services that provide Earth intelligence. In line with this goal, GEO is advancing the use of AI and ML across its [Work Programme](https://earthobservations.org/our-work/geo-work-programme) to address complex global challenges. Many of these activities demonstrate how combining AI/ML techniques with EO data from CEOS agencies can deliver practical, high-impact solutions.

**AI4EO Examples**

To accelerate these developments, GEO Work Programme includes a dedicated Enabling  Mechanism—[AI for Earth Observations (AI4EO)](https://earthobservations.org/groups/artificial-intelligence-for-earth-observations). This  builds a network of AI experts across the GEO community, with scope that includes:  advancing AI applications within the GEO Work Programme, fostering cross-disciplinary collaboration and addressing ethical considerations associated with AI in EO.

The following examples illustrate GEO Work Programme activities that apply AI/ML in combination with EO satellite data provided by CEOS agencies.

**1\. GEO Global Agricultural Monitoring (GEOGLAM) Flagship:**  
GEOGLAM applies AI based methods to integrate EO with in-situ data for near-real-time monitoring of global croplands. Its consensus-based Crop Monitors combine optical and radar time series with ground observations to assess crop condition and drought stress, and to forecast yields. These approaches are implemented both at global and national scales. Examples include the cases in the least developing countries, such as Togo, Uganda and Tanzania as highlighted in boxes J (p.32), H (p. 28\) and D (p.22) in [GEO Supplement to the UNFCCC NAP Technical Guidelines](https://earthobservations.org/documents/cc_wg/GEO_NAP_Supplement_final.pdf). GEOGLAM activities are supported by major space agencies, including NASA, JAXA, ESA and the European Commission, which contribute to the development of AI based crop classification, yield modelling, and EO-based agricultural indicators.  
   
**2\. GEO Global Water Sustainability (GEOGLOWS)** **Flagship:**  
GEOGLOWS offers a worldwide open-sourced web-based tool that provides daily 15-day forecasts and an 85-year historical simulation for every river of the world. The GEOGLOWS v2 river “hydrofabric” is based on the 12-m TanDEM-X DEM from the German Aerospace Center (DLR)**,** used by the U.S. NGA to create TDX-Hydro, a global streams and catchments dataset delineated with TauDEM and refined through conditioning. From this, GEOGLOWS derived a network of about 7 million river segments across 125 watershed clusters. Since the quality and availability of in-situ data are not the same across the globe, GEOGLOWS uses AI/ML to capture similarities in hydrological behaviors in different regions around the world to develop bias correction for global forecasts. Methodologies for bias correction of discharge developed with in-situ data are being investigated to extend to satellite altimetry (water elevation) data. A complete list of publications on GEOGLOWS methodologies, including the bias correction efforts, can be found at the [GEOGLOWS training and information site](https://training.geoglows.org/rfs/publications/.). GEOGLOWS work using AI/ML for developing countries such as Malawi has been presented at major conferences, including COP27 and 28 and the AI for Good Global Summit. 

**3\. Data Integration and Analysis System (DIAS) Enabling Mechanism:**  
DIAS is a data platform which integrates a variety of different data such as satellite and in-situ observations and models, to be analyzed for different application purposes such as forecasting/early warning, real-time monitoring and hindcast for health, biodiversity, flood and drought. In particular, EO satellite observation data includes JAXA's GSMaP. On the DIAS platform, AI/ML/Deep learning has been used to execute models. For example, [applying climate prediction data, DIAS uses deep learning for malaria infection prediction and early warning in the Limpopo province in South Africa](https://diasjp.net/wpr/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/dias_leaflet_malaria.pdf). AI/ML-based Malaria Transmission Prediction model integrates the climate forecast data with the weather forecast data and malaria patient count data from local municipalities and medical institutions. It enables the local health authority to predict malaria transmission for 3-4 months ahead. The resulting information has been distributed to the medical institutions and the public via a Malaria Forecast App for early warning since 2016\. Separately, DIAS implemented a UNESCO project called WADiRe-Africa on flood early warning in 11 West African countries: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Niger, Nigeria and Togo. This was [listed by UNESCO as its example on the use of AI for DRR in Africa](https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/use-artificial-intelligence-disaster-risk-reduction-africa) and was [presented at ITU\&WMO/UNEP workshop on AI for Natural Disaster Management](https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/Workshops-and-Seminars/2021/0623/Documents/Shamila%20Nair-Bedouelle_ITU%20WMO%20UNEP%20Workshop%20powerpoint%20for%20ADG.pdf?csf=1&e=3CQ8Oy) (see p.11). DIAS integrates data that are available, including those provided by CEOS agencies.  
   
**4\. GEO Human Planet Initiative (HPI) :**  
GEO Work Programme activity, HPI, generates global data on populations (growth) and settlements (including urban extent, critical infrastructure) to assess human exposure (people and infrastructure in hazard-prone areas) to the disasters but also increasingly vulnerability (economic values/relative deprivation). AI is used to extract info on built environment from satellite imagery. More specifically, multi-decadal satellite archived imagery collections are processed by algorithms using the latest AI techniques, making sure that the results are consistent across time and space globally. As a second step, multiple data sources are combined together using AI/ML methods to estimate population characteristics across time and space. Examples of such products are [the Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL)](https://ghsl.jrc.ec.europa.eu/about.php) (with relevant papers such as [this](https://urldefense.com/v3/__https:/www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/8/5/399/html__;!!DOxrgLBm!Aqb0fanHlJFi5Q4isXnWqVLueV-YejTRF7Qt-xZL0fu4OH340--e3t04ItKQgBq4bMdQZ7GjVEbofD0YOMMY_upb$)) and [the High Resolution Settlement Layer (HRSL)](https://urldefense.com/v3/__https:/dataforgood.facebook.com/dfg/docs/methodology-high-resolution-population-density-maps__;!!DOxrgLBm!Fq9WPMxJzUCdYTbyf8DxoeoEdSKOgL4TTt-Jg2jbrD46lrPYcUEFMpDm8EVzil3ubHW1ho8sqqoCtSse5Z7O7qd8$) (in collaboration with facebook/Meta and its Data for Good). HPI provides these global products, which can be downscaled for national/local use.   
   
**5\. Euro GEO (Regional GEO acitivity):**  
[Euro GEO](https://www.eurogeosec.eu/)’s Group for Health, coordinated by BEYOND Centre of Earth Observation Research & Satellite Remote Sensing NOA is harnessing AI technology to prevent vector borne disease in Europe. The success story of system [EYWA (Early Warning for Epidemics)](http://www.beyond-eocenter.eu/index.php/web-services/eywa) (1st HE EIC prize on Epidemics) uses EO data to generate analysis-ready products and indicators that inform the dynamic environmental, ecosystem, meteorological, climatological, and geomorphological conditions at the time and place mosquito collections and human cases of Mosquito-Borne Diseases (MBDs) have been recorded over the years. The computer representations of the Earth are used as input to AI and mathematical models that associate climate and environmental data with the corresponding MBDs cases. The models perform continuous operational predictions for generating entomological and epidemiological risks, which are then used to guide vector control actions, such as larviciding/adulticiding and trap placement, as well as door-to-door awareness raising campaigns deployed by the relevant health authorities. Starting in 2020, the EYWA system provided the first operational predictions in four regions in Greece and one region in Italy. In 2021 the system expanded to include 11 regions in five countries (France, Germany, Greece, Italy, and Serbia), addressing the West Nile Virus and other Mosquito Diseases infection in humans and three genera of mosquitoes, supporting a total of 10,909 municipalities and over 34 million residents. With the support of the [e-shape](https://e-shape.eu/). EuroGEO action and third party Institutions as Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, and Pharmaceutical Industry – TAKEDA, the EYWA system has expanded its operations in Sub-Sahara countries including Cote d’ Ivoire and Cameroun, as well as in Americas (Argentina). This story is included in the [WMO 2023 State of Climate Services Report Health](https://wmo.int/publication-series/2023-state-of-climate-services-health).  
   
**6\. Global Heat Resilience Service (GHRS) :**  
The [Global Heat Resilience Service (GHRS)](https://earthobservations.org/groups/global-heat-resilience-service) is a collaborative initiative led by the GEO and C40 Cities, with support from the World Meteorological Organization and other partners, that responds to the UN's call for action on extreme heat by providing city leaders with neighborhood-level heat risk insights through high-resolution heat maps and climate projections for 2030 and 2050\. A decision-support tool is currently being developed by IBM-C40 with support from GEO and the Gobal Covernant of Mayors and tested in cities including São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Salvador, Belo Horizonte, Caceres, Coxim in Brazil, Bangalore, and Freetown, the digital decision-support tool leverages AI in three key ways:   
The tool will leverage AI in three ways:

1. **downscaling** global climate data to neighborhood level using foundation models to produce 100-meter resolution heat maps.  
2. **data integration** from satellites, censuses, building specs, and socioeconomic indicators to update vulnerability hotspots.  
3. with **scenario planning** to model different intervention strategies \- identifying the most effective combinations of policy, physical and nature-based solutions to address heat risks city-wide.

The testing phase utilizes [Harmonized Landsat and Sentinel-2](https://hls.gsfc.nasa.gov/) satellite data, with AI models performing the downscaling and temporal interpolation necessary to generate long-term time series of high-resolution land surface temperature data.  
   
**7\. Digital Earth Pacific:**  
[Digital Earth Pacific (DE Pacific)](https://digitalearthpacific.org/) is a collaborative programme of the Pacific Community (SPC) and Pacific Island countries and territories focused on ensuring accessible use of Earth observations in the Pacific region by leveraging Analysis Ready Data (ARD) and datacube plus over 30 years of open satellite data (Landsat, Sentinel). DE Pacific supports climate resilience, food security, ecosystems monitoring, disaster risk reduction (DRR) and early warning activities through its products, i.e. coastline change, mangrove, inland wetness, satellite derived bathymetry. Many of DE Pacific's products are built using AI/ML including for cloud masking in coastline change, near shore satellite derived bathymetry, vegetation height and canopy and land cover land use change products. The programme is now investigating the use of foundational models. 

**8\. Digital Earth Africa**  
[Digital Earth Africa (DE Africa)](https://digitalearthafrica.org/en_za/) is an African program that provides access to and capacity development in EO technology for the African continent, with the aim of enhancing the application and uptake of EO in African countries. DE Africa supports climate action in particular through data and analytics addressing food and water security, nature based solutions, ecosystem management, land degradation and coastline change. ARD, such as annual surface reflectance geomedian images derived from Landsat and Sentinel missions, are provided to users alongside examples and guidance on how to incorporate them into ML workflows, such as land use classification, while a selection of DE Africa’s Continental Services (continental scale thematic products) are derived from ML applied to ARD. For example, the DE Africa Cropland Extent map was produced with ML applied to [Sentinel-2 GeoMADs](https://digitalearthafrica.org/en_za/geomad/) as input data. In this way, ARD provided by DE Africa can also be considered as ML-ready. Digital Earth Africa therefore produces and supports user creation of end-to-end ML workflows based on satellite-derived EO data.

***

[Previous](ceos-seo.md) | [Table of contents](/README.md) | [Next](nasa.md)
